Title: Domain-Agnostic Incremental Learning for Sound Classification. A DCASE 2026 Challenge task

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.02173v1

Published Time: Tue, 02 Jun 2026 02:40:36 GMT

Number of Pages: 3

Markdown Content:
Detection and Classification of Acoustic Scenes and Events 2026 28–29 October 2026, Boston, MA, USA 

# Domain-Agnostic Incremental Learning for Sound Classification. A DCASE 2026 Challenge task 

Riccardo Casciotti 1, Manjunath Mulimani 2, Manu Harju 1, Jesper Rindom Jensen 2, Annamaria Mesaros 11 Signal Processing Research Centre, Tampere University, Finland  

> 2

Department of Electronic Systems, Aalborg University, Denmark 

{riccardo.casciotti, manu.harju, annamaria.mesaros }@tuni.fi, {manjunathm, jrj }@es.aau.dk 

Abstract —This paper presents the Domain-Agnostic Incremental Learning for Audio Classification Task of the DCASE 2026 Challenge. Incremental learning refers to sequentially learning new tasks with the same system while maintaining its knowledge and performance on the previously learned task. Domain-incremental learning for sound classification refers to learning the same sound classes but in different acoustic domains, and was formalized as a data challenge for the first time in DCASE 2026. Participants will train a system to learn ten sound classes in three different domains, with learning at each incremental task not having access to previous task data. Submitted systems will be ranked by the overall average accuracy calculated over the three domains. The provided baseline system obtains a modest performance of 44.9% accuracy over the three domains, mostly due to erroneous inference of the domain for the test sample. 

Index Terms —DCASE Challenge, Incremental learning, Sound event classification 

1. INTRODUCTION 

Incremental learning, also referred to as continual or lifelong learning in some contexts, studies how machine learning models can acquire new knowledge over time without forgetting what they previously learned. The Domain-agnostic incremental learning for Audio Clas-sification task was introduced in the DCASE Challenge 2026 for the first time. The task addresses a realistic and important scenario in machine listening, where audio classification systems are required to learn sounds from a sequence of successive domains, while maintaining performance on previously encountered domains. Domain-incremental learning (DIL) is broadly categorized into two types: domain-aware and domain-agnostic incremental learning [1]. Domain-aware methods assume that domain identity is available during inference, allowing the model to select domain-specific pa-rameters. Domain-agnostic incremental learning requires the model to classify the test audio samples from all domains seen so far without explicit domain identity, making it a more challenging and practically relevant setting. An overview of the proposed domain-agnostic incremental learning (DAIL) is illustrated in Fig. 1. Domain incremental learning differs from domain adaptation meth-ods, which are restricted to only two domains: source and target [2]. Domain adaptation transfers knowledge from the source to the target domain and only considers the performance of the target domain after adaptation. Domain adaptation holds the data of the source domain to compare its distribution with the target domain. In comparison with domain adaptation, the domain incremental learning setup has multiple domains to adapt over time without accessing the previously seen domains. It takes the required measures to mitigate forgetting and considers the performance over all the seen domains so far. Incremental learning has been studied in the broader continual learning literature in different domains such as image classification [3], [4], natural language processing [5], and audio [6], [7]. Mitigation of the catastrophic forgetting phenomenon, i.e. forgetting previously learned information when learning a new task, is implemented with 

> Output  Incremental learning

Fig. 1 : Overview of Domain-agnostic incremental learning . A model is trained incrementally with data consisting of a given set of classes but from three different domains. At each incremental stage, the model provided as baseline has access only to the current domain data. At inference time, the model has no domain knowledge, and must classify the audio into one of the predefined target sound classes, irrespective of its domain. 

approaches like regularization-based methods [3], [8], replay-based strategies [4], [7], [9], and dynamic architectures [10]. In the audio domain, recent work has demonstrated the effective-ness of incremental learning for acoustic scene classification [11], sound event detection and localization [12], and audio tagging [6] with scenarios that cover class-incremental (learning new classes in successive tasks) and domain-incremental learning (learning same classes from new domains) [13]. Domain incremental learning was also used as a learning procedure for obtaining generalization across locations [11] and devices [14] for acoustic scene classification, using domain-specific normalization, low-rank adaptation, and knowledge distillation. Building on these studies, DCASE 2026 formalizes a benchmark task of domain-agnostic incremental learning for sound classification. The task setup requires systems to learn audio data from multiple domains sequentially, without access to data from previous domains and without domain labels at inference stage. This setting discour-ages fine-tuning and encourages research into learning strategies that promote long-term knowledge retention and generalization. By introducing this topic as a dedicated challenge task, DCASE provides for the first time a common evaluation framework and dataset for systematic comparison of solutions. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the task setup in detail, including the dataset, task rules, evaluation and baseline system. Section 3 presents the baseline system results; after the challenge submission deadline, this section  

> arXiv:2606.02173v1 [eess.AS] 1 Jun 2026 Detection and Classification of Acoustic Scenes and Events 2026 28–29 October 2026, Boston, MA, USA

will be extended to present the challenge outcome, comparison of results and analysis of submitted solutions. Finally, Section 4 presents conclusions and future development ideas. 

2. TASK SETUP 

In this task, continual learning is performed through incremental exposure to sound events from different domains. Models must adapt to each new domain while maintaining stable performance on earlier ones, promoting long-term learning and generalization. Participants will train a sound event classifier under a domain-incremental learning (DIL) scenario. Audio data from different domains D is revealed sequentially, and at each stage the system must learn the new domain using only its data. 

2.1. Dataset 

The task is constructed around three different domains, with the original datasets from where the sounds were selected including e.g. AudioSet [15]. The data is presented as belonging to domains D1, D2 and D3, without reference to their original provenance. The data is annotated with ten classes: alarm, baby cry, bark, engine, fire, footsteps, knock, telephone ringing, piano, and speech .The provided DIL-DCASE26 development dataset contains data from two different domains, with 139 minutes of audio from D2 and 275 minutes of audio from D3. The knowledge of Domain 1 is provided in the baseline system: the system is provided trained on D1, and no access to audio from this domain is provided. Reference labels provided with the development data include the class label and domain. Each clip is annotated with only one label. Additional sounds may be present in the audio, but there is one target sound for the classification task. The development dataset is provided with a training/test split for reporting results at the development stage. The evaluation dataset contains files from all three domains. For the evaluation data only audio will be provided, without domain information. 

2.2. Task rules, external data resources and pretrained models 

Use of external data and pretrained models that produce embeddings is not allowed. We request that the system development uses only data specifically provided in the task, for a fair comparison of the proposed approaches. However, manipulation of the provided development data is allowed, e.g. by mixing data sampled from a pdf or using augmentation techniques such as pitch shifting or time stretching. Participants are not allowed to make subjective judgments of the evaluation data, nor to annotate it. Moreover, the evaluation dataset cannot be used to train the submitted system, and the use of statistics about the evaluation data in the decision-making is forbidden. Classification decision must be done independently for each test sample. 

2.3. Evaluation and Submission 

Systems will be ranked by overall accuracy over the three domains present in the evaluation set. Accuracy will be calculated separately for each domain, then overall accuracy will be calculated as the average over the three domains. This way the three domains have equal weight in the final ranking, accounting for potential data imbalance. Domain-wise accuracy will be calculated as average of the class-wise accuracies. 

> Fig. 2 : Batch Normalization layers in the baseline model: for each domain D, a specific BN layer is trained using the data of the corresponding domain.

2.4. Baseline system 

The baseline system implements a convolutional neural network based approach, in which learning of new domains is based on adjusting the batch normalization parameters (BN layers) to reflect the data distribution of each new domain. The baseline system is based on the work in [11], and uses the domain-agnostic version of the system. The baseline system architecture consists of 6 convolutional blocks, each including 2 convolutional layers followed by a batch normal-ization (BN) layer; the layer specifications are the same as PANNs CNN14 [16]. Global pooling is applied to the last convolutional layer, to obtain a fixed-length input feature vector that feeds into the classifier equipped with a softmax activation layer. The system is trained for 120 epochs using a batch size of 32, with data shuffling between epochs. The learning uses Adam optimizer, with a learning rate at the initial phase of 0.0001, and 0.00001 at incremental phases. For training the system, the audio clips are resampled to 32 kHz if necessary, then segmented into 4-second clips. Each clip is represented using log mel-band energies in 64 bands, with lower and upper cut-off frequencies 50 Hz and 14 kHz respectively, using a Hamming window of 1024 samples with 320 samples hop size in the analysis. The baseline model is trained from scratch on D1, and provided with the knowledge embedded into it. For incremental learning of new domains D2 and D3, separate domain-specific BN layers are adapted for each domain. Figure 2 illustrates this learning procedure. During inference, domain-specific BN layers are predicted and used with domain-shared layers for classification. Specifically, an input audio is forward passed through a combination of shared and domain-specific layers of each domain seen so far, obtaining the class probabilities. Subsequently, the uncertainty of the model on the given input audio among the predicted probabilities is computed using entropy. The domain-specific layers which have minimum entropy, denoting lower uncertainty, are selected for the final classification decision. 

3. CHALLENGE RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 3.1. Baseline system results 

The baseline system results, calculated on the test split of the development dataset, are presented in Table 1. Results are presented only on domains D2 and D3, as they are provided in the development dataset. Results on D1 will be added with the evaluation dataset release. Detection and Classification of Acoustic Scenes and Events 2026 28–29 October 2026, Boston, MA, USA 

Table 1 : Accuracy of the baseline system across domains D2 and D3 

Last learned domain Tested domain D2 D3 

D2 54.7 54.7 D3 – 35.0 

Average across domains 54.7 44.9 

After learning D2, the system had an accuracy of 54.7% on the test data of D2. After incrementally learning D3, the system has an accuracy of 35.0% on the test data of D3, and maintains a performance of 54.7 on D2. The average accuracy of the baseline model over D2 and D3 is 44.9%. The relatively low performance of the baseline comes from incor-rect prediction of the domain-specific layers, i.e., BN layers of D1 predicted for the data of D2 and D3, leading to poor performance on D2 and D3. Entropy-based uncertainty estimation for identifying the domain-specific layers may be biased towards D1 due to the effect of the other layers, trained only on D1, in the estimation. With a task-dependent approach, where the correct BN layers are selected for each test item, performance is 71.8% on D2 after learning it; after learning D3, performance on D3 is 63.4%, and performance on D2 is maintained. In a task-dependent approach, the average across the two domains is 67.6%. This indicates that more advanced methods for accurate prediction of domain-specific layers should significantly improve the overall performance. 

3.2. Challenge results 

This section will be written once the challenge submission deadline has passed. 

4. CONCLUSION 

This paper introduced the setup and baseline system for Task 7 of the DCASE 2026 Challenge, which addresses incremental learning of audio for the first time in a challenge setup. 

REFERENCES 

[1] M. Mulimani and A. Mesaros, “Domain-incremental learning for audio classification,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , 2025, pp. 1–5. [2] S. Gharib, K. Drossos, E. Cakir, D. Serdyuk, and T. Virtanen, “Unsuper-vised adversarial domain adaptation for acoustic scene classification,” in 

Workshop on Detection and Classification of Acoustic Scenes and Events (DCASE) , 2018, pp. 138–142. [3] J. Kirkpatrick, R. Pascanu, N. Rabinowitz, J. Veness, G. Desjardins, A. A. Rusu, K. Milan, J. Quan, T. Ramalho, A. Grabska-Barwinska, et al. ,“Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks,” in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , vol. 114, no. 13, 2017, pp. 3521– 3526. [4] S.-A. Rebuffi, A. Kolesnikov, G. Sperl, and C. H. Lampert, “icarl: Incremental classifier and representation learning,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ,2017, pp. 2001–2010. [5] C. d. M. d’Autume, S. Ruder, and L. Kong, “Episodic memory in lifelong language learning,” in Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) , 2019, pp. 5367–5379. [6] M. Mulimani and A. Mesaros, “A closer look at class-incremental learning for multi-label audio classification,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing , vol. 33, pp. 1293–1306, 2023. [7] Y. Xiao, X. Liu, J. King, A. Singh, E. S. Chng, M. D. Plumbley, and W. Wang, “Continual learning for on-device environmental sound classification,” in Proceedings of the 7th Detection and Classification of Acoustic Scenes and Events 2022 Workshop (DCASE2022) , Nancy, France, November 2022. [8] Z. Li and D. Hoiem, “Learning without forgetting,” IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , vol. 40, no. 12, pp. 2935– 2947, 2017. [9] Z. Wang, C. Subakan, E. Tzinis, P. Smaragdis, and L. Charlin, “Con-tinual learning of new sound classes using generative replay,” in IEEE Workshop on Applications of Signal Processing to Audio and Acoustics (WASPAA) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 308–312. [10] L. Li, D.-W. Zhou, H.-J. Ye, and D.-C. Zhan, “Addressing imbalanced domain-incremental learning through dual-balance collaborative experts,” in Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. [11] M. Mulimani and A. Mesaros, “Online domain-incremental learning for acoustic scene classification across locations,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Workshop on Applications of Signal Processing to Audio and Acoustics (WASPAA) , 2025. [12] R. Pandey, M. Mulimani, A. Politis, and A. Mesaros, “Class-incremental learning for sound event localization and detection,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing Workshops (ICASSPW) . IEEE, 2025, pp. 1–5. [13] G. M. Van de Ven and A. S. Tolias, “Three scenarios for continual learning,” in Continual Learning Workshop NeurIPS , 2018. [14] M. Mulimani and A. Mesaros, “Acoustic scene classification across mul-tiple devices through incremental learning of device-specific domains,” in Proceedings of the DCASE Workshop , 2024, pp. 81–85. [15] J. F. Gemmeke, D. P. Ellis, D. Freedman, A. Jansen, W. Lawrence, R. C. Moore, M. Plakal, and M. Ritter, “Audio set: An ontology and human-labeled dataset for audio events,” in IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech and signal processing (ICASSP) . IEEE, 2017, pp. 776–780. [16] Q. Kong, Y. Cao, T. Iqbal, Y. Wang, W. Wang, and M. D. Plumbley, “PANNs: Large-scale pretrained audio neural networks for audio pattern recognition,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing , vol. 28, pp. 2880–2894, 2020.